[DECLUTTER WHY] rewrite network level privacy (#587)
zkSNACKs/WasabiDoc: docs/why-wasabi/NetworkLevelPrivacy.md

Thus it is very difficult to find out which transactions originated from which full node.
However, when a node or a wallet does not gossip all transactions, but only the transactions of its user, then it is easier to find out which node has sent those specific transactions.

> Compare this to other 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

There are light wallets, which query a backend server to get information regarding specific addresses, or use [BIP 37](/using-wasabi/BIPs.md#bip-37-connection-bloom-filtering) bloom filtering SPV wallet protocol, which is [extremely bad for privacy](https://jonasnick.github.io/blog/2015/02/12/privacy-in-bitcoinj/).
And there is Electrum, which [sends your addresses](https://www.reddit.com/r/Bitcoin/comments/2feox9/electrum_securityprivacy_model/ck8szc0/) to random Electrum servers.

> An extended public (xPub) key is a part of the Bitcoin standard [BIP32](/using-wasabi/BIPs.md#bip-32-hierarchical-deterministic-wallets), it can be thought of as a master view into a wallet.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> By using the extended public key it's possible to derive all past and future addresses and unspent transaction outputs (UTXOs).

Author: ```suggestion
```

This means that it is possible (but not mandatory) to start Bitcoin Core during the startup of Wasabi.
Without having to install or configure anything.
:::

However, even if no full node is installed, Wasabi has a light client mode based on [BIP 158 block filters](/using-wasabi/BIPs.md#bip-158-compact-block-filters-for-light-clients).
The Wasabi server sends a filter of all the transactions in each block to all the users.
Then, users check locally if the block contains any transactions with their addresses.
If not, then the filter is stored for later reference, and no block is downloaded.
However, if there is a user transaction in that block, then Wasabi connects to a random Bitcoin P2P node over Tor, and asks for this entire block, not only one transaction.
This block request is indistinguishable from the regular P2P gossip, and thus nobody, neither the server nor the full node, know which addresses belong to the user.

:::tip Privacy by default!
Wasabi has network level privacy as good as a Bitcoin full node.
:::

## In depth comparison 

> Furthermore, network level privacy consists of two sub categories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, network level privacy consists of two sub-categories.
```

However some papers note it’s not bulletproof:

> Bitcoin transaction propagation does not hide the source of a transaction very well, especially against a “supernode” eavesdropper that forms a large number of outgoing connections to reachable nodes on the network.
>  ~ [Dandelion: Privacy-Preserving Transaction Propagation](/using-wasabi/BIPs.md#bip-156-dandelion-privacy-enhancing-routing).

#### Adversaries identified

- Malicious Peer
- Supernode

### Bitcoin Core + Tor

You can use Bitcoin Core with Tor, which solves some of the above mentioned issues.
In this case a supernode cannot track back transactions to your IP address.

An entity that can break Tor is a universal adversary, however, most Tor attacks are not possible if exit nodes are not involved.
It is reasonable to assume that this entity can break the onion routing, not Tor’s encryption itself.

#### Adversaries identified

- Tor breaker

### Wasabi Wallet light node

#### Private transaction broadcasting

All Wasabi traffic is tunneled through Tor.

> Wasabi connects only to onion nodes, so end to end encryption is enforced between us and our peers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wasabi connects only to onion nodes, so end-to-end encryption is enforced between the wallet and peers.
```

All this without involving any exit node.
Wasabi connects to each peer through a different Tor stream.
A new Bitcoin peer is chosen for every transaction broadcast.

:::tip Everything over Tor!

> Wasabi broadcast transactions to only one peer over Tor and immediately after that we disconnect the peer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wasabi broadcast transactions to only one peer over Tor, and immediately after that the peer is disconnected.
```

:::

#### Private UTXO retrieval

The backend server served a constant filter table to all the clients over Tor.

> From those filters the clients figures out which blocks they are interested in and downloaded these [and some false-positive blocks] from peers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From those filters the clients figure out which blocks they are interested in and downloaded these [and some false-positive blocks] from peers.
```

One block per peer, and always over a fresh Tor stream.
When a block was acquired, the peer was disconnected.
Because of the end-to-end encryption of the onion network, it immediately defeats an ISP adversary and makes the already impossible job of the Sybil adversary even more impossible.
The only adversary that could possibly overcome this would have to setup thousands of full nodes over onion and also break Tor itself.

#### Adversaries identified
- ISP
- Tor Breaker Sybil Attacker With Thousands Of Full Nodes Over Onion

### Wasabi Wallet + full node

:::tip
Since [v1.1.10](https://github.com/zkSNACKs/WalletWasabi/releases/tag/v1.1.10), Wasabi has [partial Bitcoin Core integration](https://github.com/zkSNACKs/WalletWasabi/pull/2495).
This means that it is possible (but not mandatory) to start Bitcoin Core during the startup of Wasabi.
Without having to install or configure anything.
:::

#### Private transaction broadcasting

> Even when Wasabi is connected to your own node, it will broadcast the transaction in the above described way, to one new peer over Tor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even when Wasabi is connected to your own node, it will broadcast the transaction in the above described way: to one new peer over Tor.
```

#### Private UTXO retrieval

> If you have a listening full node running in the background (not only Bitcoin Core, any full node) then Wasabi automatically picks it up and instead of asking peers for blocks, it asks blocks from your own node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a listening full node running in the background (not only Bitcoin Core, any full node) then Wasabi automatically picks it up and instead of asking peers for blocks, it asks for blocks from your own node.
```

> Using Wasabi this way results in the same privacy model as Bitcoin Core’s regarding Private UTXO Retrieval.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Wasabi this way results in the same privacy model as Bitcoin Core’s, regarding Private UTXO Retrieval.
```

> Using Wasabi this way results in the same privacy model as Bitcoin Core’s, regarding Private UTXO Retrieval.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using Wasabi this way results in the same privacy model as Bitcoin Core's, regarding Private UTXO Retrieval.
```
